[Music]
Hey
going to the beach well listen up this
phenomenon takes hundreds of lives each
year but only 5% of people know about it
any experienced lifeguard will warn you
about a deadly phenomenon that claims
the lives of more than 100 American
beach goers every year in fact about 80%
of all rescues that lifeguards make have
a connection to this danger no it's not
sharks or poisonous jellyfish or
anything like that the most treacherous
thing that can happen to you in the
ocean is a totally natural phenomenon
called a rip current we're gonna tell
you everything you need to know about it
in order to stay safe in ocean waters
but before we do that take this
opportunity to hit that big red button
and subscribe to the bright side of life
while you're at it
ring the notification bell so you'll
always be the first to see our daily
updates what is a rip current and how is
it so deadly a rip is basically a strong
current on the surface of the ocean that
flows away from the shore different
factors can cause a rip current to form
for instance if wave heights change too
rapidly a rip will usually appear this
type of current can show up near pierce
voting docks and groins not the bodily
kind but the structures built to protect
the shore from erosion that go by the
same name also when there are some
breaks and sandbars water returns to the
ocean through these channels this
usually happens near the beach and
creates extremely strong rip currents
that can stay in the same place for
weeks or even months but in any case the
main ingredient for all rip currents is
breaking waves
if there are no breaking waves you don't
have to worry about any rips the main
danger of a rip is that it flows seaward
away from the shore so it can easily
pull unaware swimmers with it how
dangerous a rip can be depends on the
weather the shape of the beach tides and
other factors average rip currents move
at a speed of about one to two feet per
second
but if a current is particularly strong
it can pull you out into the open ocean
at an astonishing eight feet per second
even the best Olympic swimmer out there
wouldn't be able to get back to the
shore against such a mighty current
what's worse Rip's tend to gain speed
dramatically over a short period of time
a lot of beachgoers who can't swim
prefer to stay in waist-deep water
because they feel safe when their feet
are touching the bottom but they're no
safer from rip currents because a rip
can easily sweep you off your feet and
yank you away from the shore and if you
can't swim this can end tragically there
are all kinds of misconceptions
surrounding rip currents one of the most
popular is that they'll pull you
underwater but in reality a rip won't
drown you it'll simply carry you away
for sure whoo that's a relief I guess
another widespread myth is that if you
get caught in a rip current
it'll keep pulling you out into the
ocean forever again not quite yes a rip
can pull you quite far into open waters
but even in the worst case scenario you
won't find yourself miles away from the
shore you'll probably just have to swim
a pretty long way to get back to the
beach it's also entirely possible and
quite probable that the RIP itself will
bring you back and that's because 90% of
rip currents move in gigantic circles
this means that they flow from the
shallow waters to the open ocean and
then back again there's also a
misconception that if you don't see a
rip current you don't need to worry but
these things can totally form out of the
blue like if several waves coming from
different directions crash into each
other
boom you now have a Riptide so if the
beach you're visiting is infamous for
rip currents always be extra cautious
how to identify a rip current going off
that last note in order to be extra
careful and safe at the beach you need
to know how to spot a rip current it
often looks like a calm patch of water
between breaking waves which at first
glance seems like the best place
to enter the water but don't let the
tranquility deceive you because you
might inadvertently pick the most
dangerous place to swim the following
signs can also indicate the presence of
a rip current some area has a deeper
darker color than the rest of the water
there's a break in the coming waves
there's seaweed and foam moving toward
the shore from the ocean you see an area
of choppy water what to do if you've
been caught in a rip current when a
person gets caught in a rip their
actions determine their fate period the
first thing you absolutely must do is
stay calm panicking does not help in
fact it ends up costing people their
lives when they're overcome by it second
you need to conserve energy do not
attempt to swim against the rip current
toward the shore even the weakest rips
move faster than you can swim if you try
to fight the current you'll just expend
all your energy and strength which will
lead to tragic consequences as we
already mentioned the vast majority of
rip currents move in huge circles they
typically flow 160 to 300 feet offshore
and then come back around but still
associate professor Rob Brander who's
field of research is rip currents and
beach hazards and safety measure drips
that went up to 1,300 feet away from the
shore doctor Brander also established
that there isn't just one overarching
escape strategy from a rip current you
should take into consideration the
conditions and the RIP features the best
thing you can do is stay afloat remember
to hold your hands up to get the
lifeguards attention and signal that you
need help after that you have two
options
if the RIP is circulating it will
eventually bring you back either to a
sand bank or to breaking waves that'll
take you back to shore it could also
just take you seaward until there are no
more breaking waves at that point the
current ceases to exist and you can wait
for rescuers or even swim back to the
shore just make sure you're swimming
around the rip
the second option will only work for
really good swimmers if you're one of
them
you can try to swim parallel to the
beach to get out of the current in some
cases it's possible to break free this
way but this is still a subject of
ongoing debate
dr. Jamie McMann a professor of
Oceanography was once caught in a rip
current himself well he wasn't really
caught but put himself in one at his own
free will as a rip current expert at the
Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey
California he decided to research rip
currents from the inside and record a
safety video for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration at one
point while he was trapped in the
current he tried to follow life-saving
guidelines and swim parallel to the
shore but realized he couldn't do it
because the RIP wasn't giving in dr.
McMahon is very experienced with this
sort of stuff which is why he wasn't in
any immediate danger but the situation
made him think perhaps trying to reach
the beach swimming parallel to it isn't
the best escape strategy he started his
own research using GPS devices to track
rip currents in France England and the
US on top of that he himself has eagerly
jumped into rips all over the globe talk
about dedication to your work among the
great number of currents he studied only
10 to 20 percent did not return back to
the shore the rest of them moved in
circles
so if you get trapped in a rip you can't
really know where it's flowing
therefore swimming parallel to the beach
leaves you with a 50/50 chance that
you'll be struggling against the
hazardous current the conclusions he
made based on his research are certainly
different from what most people are told
according to dr. McMahon when caught in
a rip current you should just relax and
go with the flow he says that chances
are it'll bring you back to the shore in
a few minutes McMahon's research has
definitely sparked a number of heated
discussions within the rip current
research community
and while his findings are used in
Australia to teach people how to survive
dangerous rips in some countries his
conclusions and recommendations are
ignored or even considered potentially
fatal in any case the main reason why
people lose their lives when stuck in a
rip current comes down to panic when
they find themselves suddenly being
pulled away from the shore at a high
speed terror ensues they start to panic
wear themselves out in the fight and
drowned because of it
what you should do instead is stay calm
take control of the situation keep
afloat weigh your options and don't
exhaust yourself if you take these steps
you'll have a much better chance of
getting out of this horrible situation
alive so have you ever seen or been
caught in a Riptide
what would you do or have you done to
escape one let us know about your
experiences and opinions on the topic in
the comments below
we hope this life-saving information has
been useful for you and if it has give
the video a like and send it to everyone
you know stay safe out there and we'll
see you next time on the bright side of
life
you